the Israeli military has confirmed that
it has been flooding tunnels used by
Hamas under the territory the Army said
that it was channeling quote large
volumes of water into hamas's tunnel
network but claimed it was making sure
groundwater wasn't affected Israeli
media reported in December that Israeli
forces were testing using seawater to
flood the tunnels experts warned that
doing so could permanently damage
freshwater supplies for gaza's 2 3
million residents and risk the lives of
hostages still being held by
Hamas let's get more on this from Mike
Martin he's a former British army
officer and Senior fellow in the
department of War studies at Kings
College London Mike the Israeli Army
says some of the tunnels that belong to
the hundreds of kilometers of tunnel
Network are being flooded in an attempt
to flush out Hamas militants and destroy
the tunnel structure can this actually
work
good morning Michael uh ye yes in in a
in a fairly ruthless approach it's it's
very simple um you can pump in sea water
as you said in your package all you need
is a a fire hydrant something that every
fire department has and and you can run
that for 24 hours and it is as simple as
it sounds water flows downhill and we
know some of these structures are very
deep and it fills up the system from the
bottom and then either if you're in that
tunnel you either drown or you have to
come to the surface which is obviously
what the IDF wants with this
activity many of our viewers know that
more than a 100 Israeli hostages are
still being held by Hamas some of whom
are believed to be in the tunnels
doesn't the Army risk drowning the very
people they're trying to
rescue in a sense actually what we're
seeing here with this story about
flooding tunnels is a perfect example
which describes the Strategic tension
that the Israelis have in their War aims
they aim to destroy Hamas but also to
release the hostages that is repeated
daily by the Israeli government but
actually it's probably impossible to
achieve both of those aims the only time
that hostages have been released is when
in fact there has been a ceasefire and
whilst the war fighting has gone on
we've seen hostages killed
and so here when they're flushing out a
tunnel to perhaps get rid of Hamas
supplies or to take on militants
obviously the most sensible place for
the hostages to be is in the tunnel
Network so yes they are exactly put in
danger so it's a perfect example of the
tension the Strategic tension at the
center of the Israeli War
aims experts say that flying tunnels is
a dangerous option that poses huge risks
to gaza's already besieged civilian
popul a what do they
mean well I think there's two things
here what one was what you mentioned in
your package which is about groundwater
and of course it's only sea water that
they can pump in because that's you know
obviously gaza's on the coast and that's
the biggest volume of water and they
need a lot of volume to flush out the
entire tunnel Network that will seep
into groundwater and a lot of Garin gets
their water from Wells so that's a huge
problem but the other problem is what
this flooding does is it is it pits some
of the Garen population between aerial
bombardment and flooding underground
inevitably some of these tunnels will
have been abandoned or there will be
lots of tunnels that aren't being used
and some elements of the gar and
population will be hiding in them the
best place to go when there's excessive
aerial bombardment as we're seeing is
underground and so by flooding the
tunnels it puts the population in
between a rock and a hard place
Mike we only have half a minute or so
but I am curious uh Israel says that
dismantling tunnels is a slow process
and could take years what sort of push
back could be expected from Hamas and do
they even have any interest in
preserving those
tunnels very briefly uh the tunnels are
essential to Hamas any fighting force
needs a rear area where it can store
supplies prep treat casual
and in this case as we've heard hold
hostages um removing the tunnel network
from Hamas um makes it very very
difficult for them to continue to fight
the people will survive but they will
lose all of their military
infrastructure weapons supplies and
ability to move around the territory
unseen that again is Mike Martin from
the Kings College London as ever many
thanks
Mike thank you Michael